- So Menno, so happy to have you here.
We're gonna talk
- My pleasure.
a little bit today about the
overuse of carbohydrates,
which you are an expert in.
And I think you wrote the
best paper I've ever read
on that subject.
Also, in case I forget,
"The Science of Self Control" is your book
and I just started it
and it looks totally rad.
Also pretty much everybody I know
who's anywhere in nutrition space
that talks about having
to control your appetite
has recommended your book.
So your book is coming
- Nice.
at me in all directions.
So happy to have you.
- Nice, yeah, and thank you
very much for the compliment.
- I wrote for-
- Well you wrote the paper.
It's awesome.
- Yeah, both took a long time
but I'm really pleased with the results
and the reception so far.
- So my first question,
this was a meta analysis.
Was this your first meta analysis?
- First systematic
review that we published,
we didn't run the stats
on the meta officially,
but we made it a full systematic review.
I didn't think it was worth
actually going into what's
statistically significant
because the findings were so overwhelming.
For example, for the control
of calories versus not,
a clear finding was, it's
really all of the studies,
finding carbohydrates have benefits
for performance are
not calorie controlled.
So we cannot say whether
it was the calories
or the carbohydrates that
really make them perform better,
like, all of them.
So there isn't a single study, literally,
there isn't a single study,
a high quality study,
that's calorie controlled between groups
that finds that a higher
carbohydrate intake
outperforms a lower carbohydrate intake
for strength performance, or
muscle growth, for that matter.
- That's shocking.
- Yeah, especially because
there have been numerous papers
and this is also why I
wanted to write the review,
numerous papers and I'm sure,
you know so many experts,
many of them very well intentioned,
well-read, well-educated,
that recommend super high
carbohydrate intakes.
So like in a literature
you'll find ranges up to
10 gram per kilogram,
which I'm about 95 kilogram when bulking,
so 950 grams of carbohydrates
would be the
- Insane.
recommendation for me.
It's insane, exactly.
- Insane.
Absolutely insane.
- And you're gonna get
so fat eating that.
- Yeah, even half of that
would be wildly excessive.
So I mean, I'd have trouble
even fitting that into my calories.
Like, that's 4,000 calories
just from the carbs.
- How do you even fit that in your stomach
through the course of a day?
- Yeah, that too.
- Well, with sushi I would
manage, but. (laughs)
- Sure, and that's what got me
so excited about your paper.
Like I had read so many things
that advocated for higher carbohydrate
and then I come across
athletes all the time
that they're really interested
in eating high carbohydrate,
and also let's be honest,
they're not excited
about eating more salads,
they want dense carbohydrates.
- Yeah always starches.
- Yeah, so it's like, you know,
they might call that flexible or whatever,
but it's like,
you're just eating garbage
and you're gonna look like
garbage, and feel like garbage,
because that's not what your body needs.
And so when you came out with your paper,
just the small amount of carbohydrates
and the high impact that that can have,
like you just really don't need that much.
And in fact, I mean, if somebody
wants to sustain ketosis,
they probably can and still eat
that small amount of carbohydrate.
Now, some people don't care about that.
Some people think that's
the most powerful thing in
the world and mm, maybe,
well, no, it's not the most
powerful thing in the world.
It's a good thing from time to time.
So I really was excited about that.
Now my book, "Weightlifting
is a Waste of Time"
that published a little over a year ago
and I did not have your reference.
When I reedit this book,
I'm putting your reference in there
as opposed to one that's there.
And it said something like,
and I mean, I had to just
sort of pick something.
And the reason I was looking to-
'Cause a little bit before,
I didn't recommend
really any carbohydrates,
I was just kind of pure carnivore,
but I realized that that's
unrealistic for most people.
They just don't want to do it.
And so, if a diet is so
good nobody will do it
it's not good at all.
So ultimately like,
and I mean, hey, how many
physicians have you talked to
it's just like compliance?
Like if the drug gives you heartburn,
if the pill gives you heartburn,
patient's not gonna take it.
So, we gotta find another way.
That was one of my initial experiences
in medical device industry.
People didn't want to
take bisphosphate drugs
for their bone density losses
because they had some
pretty bad side effects.
And then they came up
with an injectable version
and people still didn't feel very well.
And so there was an opportunity there
to have a physical medicine intervention,
which is what I developed as many,
that's Osteostrong, that's my first thing.
So I just really going back
and looking at what do we actually need?
And oh, and I wanted to
recommend some carbohydrates
just for practicality so
people would follow it.
But also if we're to induce hyperplasia,
so I have people doing something
that's vasodilation type property,
so they can take Epimedium
if they don't want to have a prescription
for like Viagra, or Cialis,
or something like that.
'Cause most people don't wanna
bother get a prescription,
but there are vasodilators out there,
nitrous oxide is another one of them.
So they would do that,
then they would ingest, you know,
I had like half their body weight
in grams of carbohydrate,
and then do a workout.
So they really over hydrate the muscle
and then they stretch.
And so there's a few studies
that suggested this is gonna
cause muscle cells to split
and people have had some, well, let's see,
it was Jose Antonio,
Professor Jose Antonio,
that that was his dissertation.
And so I followed along
with that and recommended
sort of all these things together,
but I would always feel like garbage
when I had that much carbohydrate.
Like you'd think based on what we-
You know, people tell us,
oh, carbohydrates are energy.
Yeah, maybe.
But I mean, I know when I'm accustomed
to not having a lot of carbohydrates,
then I do it pre-workout, I feel awful.
I have the worst workout ever.
But if I had maybe (indistinct)
of glucose tablets, I feel
great, but that's not much.
And so yeah, your paper was like,
man, this is what I needed to see,
'cause this just hadn't
really been shown yet.
And some of those papers-
- That's basically what we
recommend in our paper.
- Yeah, yeah.
I mean, I recommend
your paper to everybody.
And yeah, I think that
is probably gonna be,
at least my like position
stand on that subject
because it just doesn't
make you feel like crap.
Also, it's not gonna affect
triglycerides very much.
So some of these people who are dieting,
they've got higher low
density lipoprotein.
In fact, the highest your LDL goes
is when you're fasting
or just burning body fat,
even through a caloric deficit.
Because you're using fat as fuel.
So the LDL goes up.
But then when you also
have high triglycerides,
that's like a recipe for a stroke.
Because what happens is these people,
they're trying to lose a bunch of body fat
and then let's say they decide
to have like a cheat meal
or whatever and it's just
massive carbohydrates,
like wow, I don't think
that's a great idea.
I think you could actually
be like on the edge
of triggering a stroke.
Maybe I'm overreactive about that,
but I know that following
your recommendation,
no one's gonna have an issue with that.
Does that make sense?
- I think our recommendations
are pretty similar
in the sense that we
do recommend some carbs
because it's more like
to be safe than sorry,
and also practical.
So in the paper we
recommend 15 gram net carbs
preworkouts which is not much,
it's very easy too.
And it doesn't even have
to be like glucose tablets.
A lot of people always
like go to these things,
and it can definitely work,
but it can even be fruit,
vegetables.
- Sure.
Like anything that
- In my book
can do the job.
I recommend rice
'cause everybody can find rice,
I don't care where the hell
you are.
- It all
pretty much ends up as glucose
anyway in the body.
- That's right.
Yeah and that's kind of
what I was going for.
And then, you know,
for the people who are really
concerned about oxalates,
like rice really doesn't have that.
There's not a lot of
anti-nutrients in rice.
So yeah,
I feel like that's-
- Yeah, there's
interesting research that white rice
actually results in higher protein balance
than whole grain rice.
And that's likely because
of the antinutrients
that reduce the protein absorption.
- That's right.
Yeah.
Yeah, I didn't know what
to make of that study.
And I didn't know whether
to like post it to the fans
because it's like, am I just
gonna confuse everybody here?
Sometimes it's like
something really important,
but if I say rice, people
are like, okay, it's rice.
But then if I go into
the weeds and explain
it's like am I just gonna have
people look at all this stuff
and go fuck it, I'll just
go buy weight gainer?
- Hmm, yeah, I mean, you don't need rice,
you don't need weight gainer, it can be-
- Oh, weight gainer is horrible.
I don't even know why
they still make that.
- Because people buy it.
- They will buy it, exactly.
- You can sell people the biggest crap
for the price of steak
and you call it weight
gainer (audio glitches)
- Yeah, it's a absolute tragedy
what is sold in nutrition space.
Now one thing-
So I got a little bit different take
on intermittent fasting than I think some.
So I tell people there
may not be any magic
as far as the energy deficit,
energy deficit may be the same.
Now I think there's a curve ball
when it comes to dry fasting.
Because like my calories,
my basal metabolic rate
plus activity is 3,300
or at least that's as good as
the calculator's gonna gimme.
I mean, who knows how right that is,
but it's probably right around there.
I think that when you-
You can get aggressive with a deficit
with a couple of fasted days,
like let's say I wanna go
three and a half days fasted
and then eat maintenance
calories the rest of the week.
Well, 50% energy restriction
over the course of a week,
if you try to do that every day,
you'd have a metabolic adaptation,
which means weight loss would stop working
after a period of time.
But you would feel horrible.
But when you're fasted, you're not hungry.
So I do 72 hours,
I don't do three and a half days,
but I do 72 hours dry fasted
when I want to drop body fat.
And like, that's awesome.
But I also-
- I think a lot of people
misunderstood my last post on fasting.
To me, like fasting doesn't work.
And the study doesn't
say fasting doesn't work.
The study says fasting works
because it induces an energy deficit.
- Sure.
- Exactly.
I want to dispel the
notion that it's magical
in that regard or that you have to fast.
- Right, right.
It's a, yeah, if you
prefer calorie deficit,
you prefer a more normal every day,
which some people would.
Especially like the dry fasting's great,
but if you work outside in the heat,
no, you cannot do dry fasting.
Yeah that will not be prudent.
- No, I tell everybody,
if you even get hot at your
office, don't dry fast,
you know, dry fast over the
weekends or something like that.
There's a study, I'm sure
you've read this one,
it was done in Germany by a
couple of Germans and Greeks.
And the name's just not
coming to me right now,
but it's a Greek name so
I'd probably ruin it anyway.
But they did five day dry fasts.
And there was a follow up
study where they replicated it.
- That's a long fast.
- Especially with no liquids.
- Yeah.
- And funny thing, like after a day,
you just don't even think about it.
I'm actually dry fasted,
let's see, about 60 hours right now.
- Really?
Wow.
- Yeah, I'm fine, I'm fine.
And, you know, I noticed
little things like,
you know, the level of hydration,
like my hands don't look as
vascular as they normally do
or whatever.
But I did this the first time I did it,
measured the volume of my urine each day,
same amount of urine every day.
- Sorry?
- Same amount of urine every day.
- That's interesting, yeah.
- Yeah.
Well so then taking the water
from our only nonvascular
tissue that we drag around,
body fat.
So it works really well.
But what I think the
mistake people are making
is they're trying to
get away with tiny fasts
that don't really do anything.
And then they go and
eat too much. (laughs)
So it's like, yeah.
I mean, if you're you're metabolic rate
plus activities, like me, like 3,300
and you just eat 3,300
calories at the end of the day,
and you skip the first two
meals, like you did nothing.
- Yeah that's what most
people have with Ramadan
where they
- Yeah, oh and
have all these treats
they eat like,
and
feast at night
and it's like, man.
- Yeah, most people end up maintaining,
which is actually still surprising
considering how much junk they eat
and they still maintained
their body composition.
- Right.
Well, yeah,
they only have a certain
window to be able to eat.
So the sun has
to be down.
- Yeah, exactly.
They do a lot in short time.
- Northern living Muslims,
if you're a Muslim and you live in London
your Ramadan day is quite a bit shorter
than it is in the middle east.
'Cause it's different,
hemisphere's different sunlight.
And so they sometimes only
have like a couple hours to eat
before they gotta go to bed
and they're doing better
because they don't have so much time
to eat all the junk food
they want to get in the
middle of the night.
Yeah, I think that's-
Well, I mean let's face it,
they're not doing it for health.
They're doing it for
the religious experience
and you know, hey,
they've given us more fasting data
than anybody else 'cause it's
like 1 1/2 billion Muslims
do it every year and people
aren't getting hurt by it.
So I lean on that quite a bit.
I got a lot of great references
from some Middle Eastern journals.
Now of course the Middle Eastern journals
don't have the same standards
that the Western journals do,
but they're getting better.
And then every once in a while
you see something in a Western journal,
you're like, wow,
who was on the peer review team for that?
I ask myself
- Quite often.
that question a lot.
I'm sure you do too.
- Yep.
- Yeah, like some of the,
have you noticed like how much,
it's 'cause of coronavirus,
but we have a lot more research
about just airborne viruses.
And it's like,
if you write a paper
about an airborne virus
and you pick the wrong statistical test,
I don't think anyone cares.
It's getting published
because each journal
wants the maximum amount
of content about that.
And so the paper quality
has just gone down.
Have you noticed that at all?
Kinda?
- I'm not an expert on viruses,
but I do notice-
A main thing I noticed
is that there was a big slump in research.
I mean my own paper that
was almost finished,
we are actually doing a study
on faster training and fasting
as well with Andie Galpin
and the last cohort
was like in the last weeks of being done
and then the Corona pandemic hit,
and the lockdowns, and everything
and it completely messed it up,
completely confounded everything
because everyone couldn't train anymore,
their whole schedules changed.
So now we're still trying
to rerun that cohort.
So that completely messed up our study.
And I know from a lot of
people that's happened.
So there's also been actually the downside
that is often not
discussed of the pandemic
and the lockdowns is the
damage it did to research
'cause it messed up so much research.
- Sure.
Oh, anything that was at a university
now all of a sudden people
can't go to the university.
- Yep.
- Yeah,
I had that challenge also.
There's a couple things that
I'm trying to have done.
When they close the university
it's never like the sports
performance department,
the nutrition department,
the endocrinology department,
they don't call and say,
yeah, I don't do that.
They just have to do it.
So yeah, that was annoying.
Well now have you been in
Portugal the entire time
during coronavirus?
- No, no.
Mostly in Brazil and Mexico,
but I have had four lockdowns
in various countries.
- Yeah.
We won't talk about the-
- I think it's on the way out.
- We won't talk about the
research on lockdowns.
When you finish that meta-analysis,
or the systematic review,
was there anything that you
wished you had got in there,
I mean like you said, there are no metrics
on what the calorie controls were.
And so like that's like
gigantic question mark,
but I mean you couldn't
do anything about it.
- Yeah, I mean,
I think the fact that
it's still overwhelmingly
in favor against carbs.
So no matter how you look at the research,
no matter which category we
looked at, which timeframe,
the majority of studies
found no beneficial effects
on higher carbo intakes.
And then you're looking at few categories
where I think there could be
an actual influence of carbs,
not just a psychological
one, but an actual one.
And that's basically people
that train twice a day,
athletes that do endurance
and strength training,
people that do more than 10 sets
per muscle group per session,
which is interesting,
if you do like the more
broken up kind of workouts,
old schools,
then actually you might
need the carbs a little bit.
It's not a big difference,
but it might have an effect.
Again, though in the only
calorie control study
by (indistinct)
they found no effect even up to 15 sets
for one muscle group.
But it's not a category I'm
particularly interested in
because I'm generally a proponent
of higher frequency training.
- Yeah, me neither.
(men speak over each other)
and you let it recover.
- Yeah I don't have my
clients do like 15 plus sets
per muscle group per session anyway.
- Yeah, that's even
higher volume than I go.
More than that we talk about.
So like someone wants
to be low carbohydrate,
they do 20 minute weight
workout, six days a week.
You talk about replenishing glycogen
in pretty much the first,
I think you mentioned like
15 grams of let's say glucose
or a carbohydrate's gonna
convert into glucose,
you're really kind of there.
Is that correct?
- Yeah, I think so
because we have three direct studies
on sort of the dose response
and overall in the literature,
it's very clear there's
no dose response effects.
Which is a big red flag, right?
The idea is that you
need the carbs for energy
and therefore you would expect
that the more carbs you need,
the more energy you have,
thus the better you perform.
But it doesn't pan out that way at all.
Like there is no dose
response effects in literature
and it's because you typically
just don't deplete enough
glycogen during your workouts.
The highest reported value
in the entire literature,
and there's a lot of papers, is 41%.
And so in one session you're almost never
gonna burn for all of your glycogen.
Now maybe if you're going
into the 15 plus set range,
then you might deplete
glycogen levels enough
in some of your type two muscle fibers,
but again, I think that's not a category
people should train in anyway.
It's not super practical.
And then afterwards,
if you look at the values
of glycogen resynthesis,
which can occur from the glycerol
backbone of triglycerides
or via a Cori cycle
where the lactates, the pump
that you get in workouts,
there's a lot of lactate production.
It can effectively be
recycled back to glucose.
So the body has very
effective mechanisms in place
to resynthesize glycogen
without actually needing
dietary carbohydrates.
And then if you look at the levels
that glycogen resynthesis occurs
in people that are even
fasted, like completely fasted,
it's still within the range where you say,
oh, look after a normal workout,
this would take about 24 hours to recover.
So even if you're training
them also every day,
which I do in some high
frequency programs,
they show complete resynthesis.
And that's why if you look at the studies,
the longer term studies,
actually the evidence became
more and more convincing.
Like the longer the timeframe you look at
in research studies, the
more convincing the evidence
that there's no effect whatsoever.
I think in our long term category
of studies up to three months,
which is about as long as
most of these studies go
'cause you typically have
college athletes and whatever,
it's I think it was 17
studies, 15 found no benefit.
And then it was actually one to one,
one found the benefits of higher carbs
and one actually favored lower carbs,
so cancel that out, it's
basically a complete wash,
like no evidence for in favor
of higher carbohydrates.
- Man, I know, (coughs)
Sorry, I have a little
allergy problem here.
I live in California,
we get a lot of plants and
they make a lot of pollen.
So God, that's such a breath of fresh air
because so many people who,
I mean, really, they just want
to eat candy, like whatever.
Like all the time somebody will,
just this morning,
somebody posted on our forum,
the X3 Users Group forum,
they posted some about like donuts.
Like last thing I would eat.
What?
And the problem with a donut isn't just,
if you want to have a one donut,
can you have one donut?
I suppose,
but then you're gonna want
to eat the rest of them too.
You're not gonna want to eat one.
And it just switches
your insulin on,
- That's good, yeah.
in a way that's so up regulated so quickly
that you lose control
and that's when people
really fall, right?
- Yeah, that's exactly
what I talk about in my book actually,
where people think they have a very naive
notional food cravings,
where they feel like if
you eat a little bit,
the craving's gone.
But actually it's the opposite.
The best way to kill a
craving is to starve it.
Like you don't eat something
and then the craving disappears
and research is super,
super clear on this.
That people that need
low carb, for example,
they lose their carb cravings,
'cause they never eat them.
Whereas if you eat a carb,
it doesn't matter how much you eat,
that's another interesting finding.
If you eat one donut or you eat 10 donuts,
the increasing cravings for
donuts is actually the same
because it's not about
the physical process
of consuming it.
It's about the fact that you trigger
the mental representation,
you're now thinking of donuts again,
you re-triggered the taste of donuts.
So next time you think of
what to eat, donuts come up.
Whereas if you never have
donuts for you, for example,
if you think about what to eat,
it's not like you're gonna
think, oh, shall I eat a donut?
No, it doesn't even cross your
mind 'cause you never eat it.
- Yeah, I tell people
don't look at that as food.
Like that's not food.
That's designed to be addictive.
Here's another question,
this may actually be,
I just thought of this,
but this may be one of
the more important ones.
How addictive are
carbohydrates by comparison
to let's say some recreational drugs?
So there's some literature out there.
I posted one,
just a study on Instagram,
that showed that sugar
has many of the similar
addictive properties
and the compliance with avoiding
is about as bad between
cocaine and carbohydrates.
And, man, I got a lot of angry people
coming at me about that.
How dare you?
Like eating an apple is not the same.
It's like, all right,
well an apple and a donut
are not the same either.
- Yeah, there's a big difference there.
- I mean, there's that.
But what do you think about
those addictive properties?
Is that accurate or is there-
- Well, I studied psychology,
so I generally stick to
the very narrow definition
of an addiction in terms of,
as that's what occurs with cocaine,
with do with dopamine desensitization,
decreased serotonin levels,
and that doesn't occur with food.
So I'd say that there's actually
no food that's addictive
in the strict medical sense.
But we can (audio glitches)
reinforcing value.
And there was a recent
study that actually found
that carbohydrates have
greater reinforcing value
and influenced the brain
pathways more than fat.
But overall, I think it's
more about palatability.
I think starches, because when
we're talking about carbs,
or you say like big difference
between apple and donuts,
I think nobody gets
addicted to cauliflower
or even apples for that matter.
So more about the palatability
where starches are just so palatable
that people want to eat them
and they generally have low self control
and they're not capable of
managing their self control,
which is much more important
than having it, I think.
And as a result, they're
constantly eating starches.
So I wouldn't say they're addictive,
but they are very easy to overeat on.
Everybody likes them,
they're very easy to eat.
And I noticed it as well
after a long period of having
basically no starches at all,
I started having some starches again
and I found out that I
was sort of craving them,
even though I didn't like them.
Like as a kid already,
I thought I don't really
get why people eat pasta
because like pasta itself
has barely any taste, right?
Rice too.
- Right, it's almost
like eating nothing.
- Just plain rice,
plain pasta, exactly.
It's like cardboard.
I mean, if you cook it well and everything
it has a little bit of taste,
but not much, not like meat.
- Yeah but it's usually the
meat sauce you put on it
that's what you want.
- Exactly.
So it doesn't even taste good on its own.
It's mostly sort of the
texture, and I don't know,
just so very easy to eat,
just hyper palatable.
So I think that's the issue mostly.
- Mm, I like that.
Probably like certain things.
I know when people switch over to a more
kind of carnivore type nutrition,
they really miss crunchy stuff.
- Yeah, crunchy stuff is a tough one.
- It is.
(Menno speaks indistinctly)
'Cause there's really
nothing you can say to 'em.
- Exactly.
Crunchy by definition means
super calorically dense
because crunchy means
it's devoid of all fluids.
So basically you're left with pure energy.
So if people say I want something crunchy,
then the it's basically
the definition of crunchy includes
crucifers vegetables or something,
which are also crunchy,
but they're more like watery crunchy,
then you're pretty much out of luck.
And the only way to get over that
is not to have crunchy stuff anymore
because it's unnatural.
Like crunchy stuff doesn't
really exist in nature.
Like maybe nuts are as close as it gets.
Or, like I said, certain vegetables.
So like the process crap that
we now have in supermarkets
and everything, it's completely unnatural.
So there's no way to tell people like,
oh yeah, you know,
you can have crunchy stuff
and eat as much as you want
it's gonna be healthy, or whatever.
- It's not.
Well, what I notice is like people go for
health bars that are made out of like nuts
that are compressed together
with they say it's honey,
but it's not sticky.
So it's really like 1% honey
and 99% caramel, you know?
So it's just like
a sugar shitstorm.
- Yeah, pure energy.
- Yeah, it's like that's not good for you.
Don't don't be fooled
just 'cause it says
nature on the package, no.
- Yeah, even the protein bars.
And the also the issue is
it kind of defeats the point
unless you're consuming it for the energy,
like if you're a high
level athlete or something
and you just need the calories.
But for most people,
the issue is when you're
bringing a bar somewhere to eat,
the issue is you want to satiate yourself
so that you're not hungry,
but those bars don't do it at all.
And protein bars actually
have the same issue
where you eat a protein bar,
if they're nice protein
bars you can eat 10
and then you still overeat.
And if you're not nice protein bars,
then you ate something that you did like,
which wasn't healthy,
because most protein bars are also crap.
And, yeah, you got your protein in.
Okay, great.
But you're still hungry.
So good chance you're still gonna overeat.
- Yeah.
I mean a lot of protein powders
they put like what they call
a minimal amount of carbohydrates,
but then you look at the package
and it's like, how is that minimal?
It was like
- That ain't chicken.
40 Grams of sugar in one serving,
like that's not minimal.
Like you went outta your way
to put as much in there.
Here's another problem I run into is
a lot of people think supplements
should taste like candy.
Yeah, I mean, if you have
a high quality protein,
one of the products that
I manufacture and sell
is it's called Fortagen,
it's an essential amino acid,
sort of map ratio,
it's a little bit sweetened with stevia,
it doesn't taste like a delicious dessert
you'd have at a fancy restaurant,
it doesn't taste bad either,
but I notice that people
really want everything
to taste like candy.
And boy, that's just the
wrong mentality, I think.
- Yeah, it's funny with caffeine,
I recommend anhydrous
caffeine to a lot of people
because it's super cheap, it's
like pure caffeine basically,
anhydrous caffeine,
And it's, in research,
the most effective way to ingest caffeine,
like to enhance performance,
it's more effective than
coffee or other forms.
But people really don't like it.
You can have it in pills,
but if you even get the pill half open,
or I use powder because then
it's literally like free
and you do need to dose it accurately,
but you use a small spoon
or whatever measuring scale.
And the thing is it's disgusting.
It's not just bad, it's
absolutely disgusting.
And it makes you wonder,
say (audio glitches)
caffeine is so much better
than caffeinated caffeine
because if you taste pure caffeine,
it is really bad, like
worse than paracetamal bad.
It's like
- Wow.
a level of bitter that
does not exist in nature.
- Whoa, okay.
How many, I mean, I don't
know if it's equivalent
to what we would drink.
I went caffeine free for about six months
and then reintroduced
and I'll have maybe like 100 milligrams
of caffeine in the morning.
- Yeah, I recommend the same.
- Yeah, 'cause once you desensitize
and reintroduce it just a tiny bit
does exactly what a lot used to do.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So it's a real small amount.
- The vast majority of people
are massively, like alcohol
actually, by medical terms,
most people or many people are alcoholics
and a lot of people are
addicted to caffeine,
or again, like a caffeine addiction
is, again, a little bit fake,
but you have to withdraw
symptoms afterwards
if they don't take it and
there's big tolerance.
So tolerance and withdrawal
are typically characterized
as two big symptoms of actual addiction.
But then nobody wants
to hear that, you know?
And in caffeine it's
probably as benign as it gets
for an addiction,
so it's not as big of a problem as
other types of addictions.
But still,
I think a lot of people
would be better off
moderating their consumption,
a lot more and using it strategically
rather than just living all off it.
- Yeah, yeah.
It's something that if you
use it when you need it,
it's wonderful.
If you just use it all the time,
then it's really not doing much.
- Yeah, that's another thing
with supplement mentality
where people have-
So I'm a proponent of
phenibut, for example,
I think it's useful to reduce anxiety.
One of the few supplements
that's still a supplement,
it's basically a drug,
but it's still characterized
as a supplement in many places,
although increasingly harder to get.
But it actually works.
Like it decreases anxiety.
And then people ask me like, okay,
like how much can I take?
Do I just take it every day?
And it's like, no, it's a drug.
Like when do you take it?
When do you take an anxiety lowering drug?
When you want
- When you have anxiety.
less anxiety.
Exactly.
Like if you're going public speaking,
maybe you want a little bit more,
but if you're just gonna
sit home on the couch,
watch Netflix, you should not
need an anxiety lowering drug.
- Also if Netflix gives you anxiety,
you might need to talk to a therapist.
- Yeah.
- It's supposed to be entertainment.
We got an anxiety problem
in society now too.
- Well after COIVD we have a
lot of mental health issues.
I think the statistics show
that over 50% of the population
had what are psychologically significant
mental health issues.
(audio glitches) but a lot
of people had loneliness,
and a lot of issues.
- Wow.
How do people come out of that?
- Well, no more lockdowns,
that definitely helps.
But yeah, just getting back
into your normal life, mainly.
- People need to be around other people.
I mean, psychology's not in my field,
but I have read that very many times.
Like you can't-
- Yeah, it's literal.
It's one of the most shocking findings
was in World War II, I think it was,
they did experiments.
I'm not sure if it was the
Nazis or other researchers,
probably the Nazis.
They had experiments on babies
where they didn't give
'em any human attention.
They made sure there were well fed,
they basically have 'em raised by robots,
and the majority of those babies died.
Like they flat out died and that's-
- Yeah, that sounds like a Nazi thing.
I don't think the Allies did that.
- Yeah.
But that's an insane finding, right?
It's like human beings,
or at least babies,
die despite being amply
physically taken care of
just because they lack
any social stimulus.
That's crazy.
- That is crazy.
Damn.
I mean,
you think about when
they put like prisoners
in solitary confinement.
I read one of those papers.
It just seemed like it
would be interesting to me
and those people were just tortured.
Like apparently that's the
worst thing you could do
to somebody as far as-
- Yeah, I can imagine.
- Yeah.
Yeah, hmm, very interesting.
During coronavirus,
people were using their X3s at home
and you know,
they still didn't have
that social interaction
'cause it's like, you know,
they didn't have to go to the gym
'cause they had an X3 at home,
which is great, but they still needed-
So I think some of 'em
started getting together
and doing X3 together
like two or three guys
at one guy's house, so I think that helps.
That was a thing that was discussed
on the discussion board.
But of course I didn't want
it to become too popular
of a subject because then it's like,
well is Facebook gonna
shut me down for that?
That was just sort of an interesting,
you gotta be careful.
Sometimes you don't know
you're breaking the rules
'cause they just decided
to make a new rule
based on what they saw you were doing.
- I guess they could do like, yeah,
you're promoting social gatherings.
- Yeah, right.
Like I didn't want anyone
to like accuse that.
And it did not end up
being that big of a problem
because there was always somebody
who was like having a concert,
or something really egregious.
So it was like that was the things
that people were complaining about,
they weren't complaining about-
- Including government officials
in every possible country.
- Yeah, it's great when
you see the officials
like not wearing masks
at a social gathering
right in the middle of the pandemic.
It was very embarrassing for them,
or at least it should have been.
And it was pretty much
the same, like worldwide,
like governments everywhere.
- In the Sao Paulo, where
I was at the time for,
I think it was Christmas and New Year,
the governor locked up the state
and people joked, like most
people lock up their home
before they leave and
he locks up the state,
and then he went to
Miami without a lockdown
and he just went there to have a holiday.
- Wow.
- Yeah.
- So he's probably not
gonna get reelected?
- Well, unfortunately
I'm not sure about that.
There's actually even a chance
he could become president.
- Oh.
- It's just people forget
quickly and many people,
yeah, it depends what the
popular news channels show
'cause CNN and everything,
there are lots of things that happen
they would just never even cover.
- Oh, okay.
Yeah, it's just like CNN here.
Yeah.
- Yeah.
Very selective coverage.
Depends on who they like.
If they don't like them,
you know like if Trump did that,
it would be like front
page of every paper.
But if somebody else
did that that they like,
it's just like, didn't happen.
Well this is great man.
I mean, I got all my questions answered.
I gotta send you a copy of
"Weightlifting's a Waste of Time".
I'm reading your book.
So I feel like I'm gonna
have a lot of questions.
Maybe we can do this again.
I can like write down a bunch of questions
about what I get from your book
and I'll send you mine.
I'm sure you'll have a lot of stuff.
Well, you're familiar
with variable resistance,
so this is not gonna be
like a big curve ball.
And also I try and point out,
like the title was meant to
really get people's attention.
"Weightlifting's a Waste of Time",
hundreds of thousands of
people bought the book.
If I had called it like
"The X3 Method" or something
nobody would've bought it.
It's just like, what's that?
I don't care.
So the graphic on the cover of your book
is that kind of good marketing.
Like it's an elephant-
I wish I had the copy of
the book, it's at my place.
But you know, there's
like the teeter totter
where there's an elephant and then a brain
on the other end.
And so, it's like we
gotta get it to balance.
- The brain's heavier than
the elephant is the metaphor.
Which sort of is to say that
like being smarter is more
important than being strong,
which is a big part of the book.
Which a shown in research even
that it's not about having self-control
and having all of discipline,
it's much more about being smart with it
and not having to rely on it.
- Mm.
- Yeah, if you look, for example,
more successful students,
or in general people that
are more successful in life,
they rely less on self-control
even if they have more self-control.
So it just avoids temptations rather than,
like with what we talked about with carbs,
if you you're prone to find certain carbs
hyper palatable and they
don't fit your diet,
then it's easier actually
not to eat them often
and consciously decide
like these foods are not worth it for me
than to occasionally have them,
because then you always
have the temptation.
And if they're in your
cupboard, and if you're hungry,
you're going to the supermarket,
those kind of things,
you end up buying it,
if you end up buying it,
you're gonna end up eating.
- Right.
Like when you go to my house,
all that's in the refrigerator,
like I don't keep meat very
long 'cause I eat it quick.
It's just steak.
I don't really have anything else.
I have beef stock if
I'm gonna do like rice,
'cause I'll cook the
rice and the beef stock,
that's an amazing flavor.
And I get a little bit of rice.
I do that right after a workout
if I don't do the
pre-workout carbohydrates.
But that's like it,
like I don't have snack
foods because I eat them.
- Yes,
they might have a total
body builder fridge,
like only a few food items,
or variety than just meat,
but just a few food items,
and then lots of oil,
and then Tupperware
containers with prepped food.
- Yep.
Yeah, that's perfect, I love it.
All right, man.
Well, thanks.
I'm I'm gonna be in touch about the book
and let's do this again, this was fun.
- Sure, my pleasure.
Let's talk again.
- All right,
All right, my pleasure.
Dr. Henselmans, thank you.
Awesome, all right.
Have a good day.